doc/index.rst, before:

Introduction
============

`DiscriminantAnalysis.jl`_ is a Julia package for multiple linear and quadratic 
regularized discriminant analysis (LDA & QDA respectively). LDA and QDA are
distribution-based classifiers with the underlying assumption that data follows
a multivariate normal distribution. LDA differs from QDA in the assumption about 
the class variability; LDA assumes that all classes share the same within-class 
covariance matrix whereas QDA relaxes that constraint and allows for distinct 
within-class covariance matrices. This results in LDA being a linear classifier
and QDA being a quadratic classifier.

Installation
============

The source code is available on Github:

  * `DiscriminantAnalysis.jl`_

.. _DiscriminantAnalysis.jl: https://github.com/trthatcher/DiscriminantAnalysis.jl

To add the package from Julia:

Theory
======

Linear and Quadratic Discriminant Analysis in the context of classification 
arise as simple probabilistic classifiers. Discriminant Analysis works under the
assumption that each class follows a Gaussian distribution. That is, for each
class :math:`k`, the probability distribution can be modelled by:

.. math::
    
    f_k(x) = \frac{\exp\left((\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})^{\intercal}\Sigma_k^{-1}(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})\right)}{(2\pi)^{p/2}\left|\Sigma_k\right|^{1/2}}

Let :math:`\pi_k` represent the prior class membership probabilities. 
Application of Baye's Theorem results in:

.. math::

    P(K = k | X = \mathbf{x}) = \frac{f_k(\mathbf{x})\pi_k}{\sum_i f_i(\mathbf{x})\pi_i}

Noting that probabilities are non-zero and the natural logarithm is
monotonically increasing, the following rule can be used for classification:

.. math::

    \operatorname{arg\,max}_k\frac{f_k(\mathbf{x})\pi_k}{\sum_i f_i(\mathbf{x})\pi_i}
    = \operatorname{arg\,max}_k log(f_k(\mathbf{x})) + log(\pi_k)

Application of the natural logarithm helps to simplify the classification rule 
when working with a Gaussian distribution. The resulting set of functions
:math:`\delta_k` are known as **discriminant functions**. In the context of LDA
and QDA, discriminant functions are of the form:

.. math::

    \delta_k(\mathbf{x}) = log(f_k(\mathbf{x})) + log(\pi_k)


Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
----------------------------------

Linear Discriminant Analysis works under the simplifying assumption that
:math:`\Sigma_k = \Sigma` for each class :math:`k`. In other words, the classes
share a common within-class covariance matrix. Since
:math:`\mathbf{x}^\intercal \Sigma \mathbf{x}` term is constant across classes, 
this simplifies the discriminant function to a linear classifier:

.. math::

    \delta_k(x) =  
    -\mathbf{\mu_k}^{\intercal}\Sigma^{-1}\mathbf{x} +
    \frac{1}{2}\mathbf{\mu_k}\Sigma^{-1}\mathbf{\mu_k}
    + \log(\pi_k)

The following plot shows the linear classification boundaries that result when a
sample data set of two bi-variate Gaussian variables is modelled using linear
discriminant analysis:

.. image:: visualization/lda.png


Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (QDA)
-------------------------------------

Quadratic Discriminant Analysis does not make the simplifying assumption that
each class shares the same covariance matrix. This results in a quadratic
classifier in :math:`\mathbf{x}`:

.. math::

    \delta_k(\mathbf{x}) =  
    -\frac{1}{2}(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})^{\intercal}\Sigma_k^{-1}(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})
    -\frac{1}{2}\log\left(\left|\Sigma_k\right|\right) 
    + \log(\pi_k)

The following plot shows the quadratic classification boundaries that result 
when a sample data set of two bi-variate Gaussian variables is modelled using 
quadratic discriminant analysis:


.. image:: visualization/qda.png

Note that quadratic discriminant analysis does not necessarily perform better
than linear discriminant analysis. 


Canonical Discriminant Analysis (CDA)
-------------------------------------

Canonical discriminant analysis expands upon linear discriminant analysis by
noting that the class centroids lie in a :math:`c-1` dimensional subspace of the
:math:`p` dimensions of the data where :math:`c` is the number of classes. 
Defining the between-class covariance matrix:

.. math::

    \Sigma_b = \frac{1}{c} \sum_{k=1}^{c} (\mu_k - \mu)(\mu_k - \mu)^{\intercal}

Canonical discriminant analysis then optimizes the generalized Rayleigh quotient
of the between-class covariance and the within-class covariance to solve for 
the optimal axes to describe class separability:

.. math::

    \operatorname{arg\,max}_{\mathbf{w}}\frac{\mathbf{w}^{\intercal}\Sigma_b\mathbf{w}}{\mathbf{w}^{\intercal}\Sigma\mathbf{w}}

For two class LDA, the canonical coordinate is perpendicular to the separating
hyperplane produced by the decision boundary. For the LDA model above, the
dimensionality is reduced from 2 to 1. The following image shows the resulting
distribution of points relative to the canonical coordinate:

.. image:: visualization/cda.png


Using LDA to do QDA
-------------------

A quadratic boundary using LDA can be generated by squaring each variable and by
producing all the interaction terms. For two variables :math:`x` and :math:`y`,
this is simply:

.. math::

    x + y + x^2 + y^2 + xy

The transformed variables may be used as inputs for the LDA model. This results
in a quadratic decision boundary:

.. image:: visualization/qlda.png

Note that this boundary does not correspond to the same boundary produced by
QDA.

Calculation Method
------------------

As a result of floating point arithmetic, full inversion of a matrix may
introduce numerical error. Even inversion of a small matrix may produce
relatively large error (see `Hilbert matrices`_), so alternative methods are 
used to ensure numerical stability.

For each class covariance matrix in QDA (or the overall covariance matrix in
LDA), a whitening matrix :math:`\mathbf{W}_k` is computed such that:

.. math::

    \operatorname{V}(\mathbf{X}_k \mathbf{W}_k) 
    = \mathbf{W}_k^{\intercal} \operatorname{V}(\mathbf{X}_k) \mathbf{W}_k
    = \mathbf{W}_k^{\intercal} \mathbf{\Sigma}_k \mathbf{W}_k
    = I \quad \implies \quad \mathbf{W} = \mathbf{\Sigma}^{-1/2}

This is accomplished using an eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix or a
singular value decomposition of the data matrix. We can then use the 
transformation:

.. math::

    \mathbf{z}_k = \mathbf{W}_k^{\intercal}\mathbf{x}
    \quad \implies \quad \mathbf{Z}_k = \mathbf{X}\mathbf{W}_k

Since we are now working in the transformed space, the determinant goes to zero
and the inverse is simply the identity matrix. This results in the simplified
discriminant function:

.. math::

    \delta_k(\mathbf{z_k}) =  
    -\frac{1}{2}(\mathbf{z_k}-\mathbf{\mu_k})^{\intercal}(\mathbf{z_k}-\mathbf{\mu_k})
    + \log(\pi_k)

.. _Hilbert matrices: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert_matrix

Package Interface
=================

.. function:: lda(X, y [; M, priors, gamma])

    Fit a regularized linear discriminant model based on data ``X`` and class 
    identifier ``y``. ``X`` must be a matrix of floats and ``y`` must be a 
    vector of positive integers that index the classes. ``M`` is an optional 
    matrix of class means. If ``M`` is not supplied, it defaults to point 
    estimates of the class means. The ``priors`` argument represents the prior 
    probability of class membership. If ``priors`` is not supplied, it defaults
    to equal class weights.
    
    Gamma is a regularization parameter that shrinks the covariance matrix 
    towards the average eigenvalue:

    .. math::

        \mathbf{\Sigma}(\gamma) = (1-\gamma)\mathbf{\Sigma} + \gamma
          \left(\frac{\operatorname{trace}(\mathbf{\Sigma})}{p}\right) \mathbf{I}

    This type of regularization can be used counteract bias in the eigenvalue
    estimates generated from the sample covariance matrix.

    The components of the LDA model may be extracted from the ``ModelLDA`` 
    object returned by the ``lda`` function:

    ========== =====================================================
    Argument   Description
    ========== =====================================================
    ``is_cda`` Boolean value; the model is a CDA model if ``true``
    ``W``      The whitening matrix used to decorrelate observations
    ``M``      A matrix of class means; one per row
    ``priors`` A vector of class prior probabilities
    ``gamma``  The regularization parameter as defined above.
    ========== =====================================================


.. function:: cda(X, y [; M, priors, gamma])

    Fit a regularized canonical discriminant model based on data ``X`` and class 
    identifier ``y``. The CDA model is identical to an LDA model, except that
    dimensionality reduction is included in the whitening transformation matrix.
    See the ``lda`` documentation for information on the arguments.

.. function:: qda(X, y [; M, priors, gamma, lambda])

    Fit a regularized quadratic discriminant model based on data ``X`` and class 
    identifier ``y``. ``X`` must be a matrix of floats and ``y`` must be a 
    vector of positive integers that index the classes. ``M`` is an optional 
    matrix of class means. If ``M`` is not supplied, it defaults to point 
    estimates of the class means. The ``priors`` argument represents the prior 
    probability of class membership. If ``priors`` is not supplied, it defaults
    to equal class weights.
    
    Lambda is a regularization parameter that shrinks the class covariance 
    matrices towards the overall covariance matrix:

    .. math::

        \mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\lambda) = (1-\lambda)\mathbf{\Sigma}_k 
         + \lambda \mathbf{\Sigma}

    As in LDA, gamma is a regularization parameter that shrinks the covariance
    matrix towards the average eigenvalue:

    .. math::

        \mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\gamma,\lambda) 
        = (1-\gamma)\mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\lambda) + \gamma
          \left(\frac{\operatorname{trace}(\mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\lambda))}{p}\right) \mathbf{I}
     
    The components of the QDA model may be extracted from the ``ModelQDA`` 
    object returned by the ``qda`` function:

    ========== =====================================================
    Argument   Description
    ========== =====================================================
    ``W_k``    The vector of whitening matrices (one per class)
    ``M``      A matrix of class means; one per row
    ``priors`` A vector of class prior probabilities
    ``gamma``  The regularization parameter as defined above.
    ``lambda`` The regularization parameter as defined above.
    ========== =====================================================

.. function:: discriminants(model, Z)

    Returns a matrix of discriminant function values based on ``model``. Each
    column of values corresponds to a class discriminant function and each row
    corresponds to the discriminant function values for an observation in ``Z``.
    For example, ``Z[i,j]`` corresponds to the discriminant function value of
    class ``j`` for observation ``i``.

.. function:: classify(model, Z)

    Returns a vector of class indices based on the classification rule. This
    function takes the output of the ``discriminants`` function and applies
    ``indmax`` to each row to determine the class.

References
==========

.. [fried] Friedman J. 1989. *Regularized discriminant analysis.* Journal of
           the American statistical association 84.405; p. 165-175.

.. [hff] Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J, Franklin J. 2005. *The elements of
         statistical learning: data mining, inference and prediction*. The 
         Mathematical Intelligencer, 27(2); p. 83-85.

Commit message:

Added notes on data matrix format as discussed in #3

doc/index.rst, after:

Introduction
============

`DiscriminantAnalysis.jl`_ is a Julia package for multiple linear and quadratic 
regularized discriminant analysis (LDA & QDA respectively). LDA and QDA are
distribution-based classifiers with the underlying assumption that data follows
a multivariate normal distribution. LDA differs from QDA in the assumption about 
the class variability; LDA assumes that all classes share the same within-class 
covariance matrix whereas QDA relaxes that constraint and allows for distinct 
within-class covariance matrices. This results in LDA being a linear classifier
and QDA being a quadratic classifier.

Installation
============

The source code is available on Github:

  * `DiscriminantAnalysis.jl`_

.. _DiscriminantAnalysis.jl: https://github.com/trthatcher/DiscriminantAnalysis.jl

To add the package from Julia:

Theory
======

Linear and Quadratic Discriminant Analysis in the context of classification 
arise as simple probabilistic classifiers. Discriminant Analysis works under the
assumption that each class follows a Gaussian distribution. That is, for each
class :math:`k`, the probability distribution can be modelled by:

.. math::
    
    f_k(x) = \frac{\exp\left((\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})^{\intercal}\Sigma_k^{-1}(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})\right)}{(2\pi)^{p/2}\left|\Sigma_k\right|^{1/2}}

Let :math:`\pi_k` represent the prior class membership probabilities. 
Application of Baye's Theorem results in:

.. math::

    P(K = k | X = \mathbf{x}) = \frac{f_k(\mathbf{x})\pi_k}{\sum_i f_i(\mathbf{x})\pi_i}

Noting that probabilities are non-zero and the natural logarithm is
monotonically increasing, the following rule can be used for classification:

.. math::

    \operatorname{arg\,max}_k\frac{f_k(\mathbf{x})\pi_k}{\sum_i f_i(\mathbf{x})\pi_i}
    = \operatorname{arg\,max}_k log(f_k(\mathbf{x})) + log(\pi_k)

Application of the natural logarithm helps to simplify the classification rule 
when working with a Gaussian distribution. The resulting set of functions
:math:`\delta_k` are known as **discriminant functions**. In the context of LDA
and QDA, discriminant functions are of the form:

.. math::

    \delta_k(\mathbf{x}) = log(f_k(\mathbf{x})) + log(\pi_k)


Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
----------------------------------

Linear Discriminant Analysis works under the simplifying assumption that
:math:`\Sigma_k = \Sigma` for each class :math:`k`. In other words, the classes
share a common within-class covariance matrix. Since
:math:`\mathbf{x}^\intercal \Sigma \mathbf{x}` term is constant across classes, 
this simplifies the discriminant function to a linear classifier:

.. math::

    \delta_k(x) =  
    -\mathbf{\mu_k}^{\intercal}\Sigma^{-1}\mathbf{x} +
    \frac{1}{2}\mathbf{\mu_k}\Sigma^{-1}\mathbf{\mu_k}
    + \log(\pi_k)

The following plot shows the linear classification boundaries that result when a
sample data set of two bi-variate Gaussian variables is modelled using linear
discriminant analysis:

.. image:: visualization/lda.png


Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (QDA)
-------------------------------------

Quadratic Discriminant Analysis does not make the simplifying assumption that
each class shares the same covariance matrix. This results in a quadratic
classifier in :math:`\mathbf{x}`:

.. math::

    \delta_k(\mathbf{x}) =  
    -\frac{1}{2}(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})^{\intercal}\Sigma_k^{-1}(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{\mu_k})
    -\frac{1}{2}\log\left(\left|\Sigma_k\right|\right) 
    + \log(\pi_k)

The following plot shows the quadratic classification boundaries that result 
when a sample data set of two bi-variate Gaussian variables is modelled using 
quadratic discriminant analysis:


.. image:: visualization/qda.png

Note that quadratic discriminant analysis does not necessarily perform better
than linear discriminant analysis. 


Canonical Discriminant Analysis (CDA)
-------------------------------------

Canonical discriminant analysis expands upon linear discriminant analysis by
noting that the class centroids lie in a :math:`c-1` dimensional subspace of the
:math:`p` dimensions of the data where :math:`c` is the number of classes. 
Defining the between-class covariance matrix:

.. math::

    \Sigma_b = \frac{1}{c} \sum_{k=1}^{c} (\mu_k - \mu)(\mu_k - \mu)^{\intercal}

Canonical discriminant analysis then optimizes the generalized Rayleigh quotient
of the between-class covariance and the within-class covariance to solve for 
the optimal axes to describe class separability:

.. math::

    \operatorname{arg\,max}_{\mathbf{w}}\frac{\mathbf{w}^{\intercal}\Sigma_b\mathbf{w}}{\mathbf{w}^{\intercal}\Sigma\mathbf{w}}

For two class LDA, the canonical coordinate is perpendicular to the separating
hyperplane produced by the decision boundary. For the LDA model above, the
dimensionality is reduced from 2 to 1. The following image shows the resulting
distribution of points relative to the canonical coordinate:

.. image:: visualization/cda.png


Using LDA to do QDA
-------------------

A quadratic boundary using LDA can be generated by squaring each variable and by
producing all the interaction terms. For two variables :math:`x` and :math:`y`,
this is simply:

.. math::

    x + y + x^2 + y^2 + xy

The transformed variables may be used as inputs for the LDA model. This results
in a quadratic decision boundary:

.. image:: visualization/qlda.png

Note that this boundary does not correspond to the same boundary produced by
QDA.

Calculation Method
------------------

As a result of floating point arithmetic, full inversion of a matrix may
introduce numerical error. Even inversion of a small matrix may produce
relatively large error (see `Hilbert matrices`_), so alternative methods are 
used to ensure numerical stability.

For each class covariance matrix in QDA (or the overall covariance matrix in
LDA), a whitening matrix :math:`\mathbf{W}_k` is computed such that:

.. math::

    \operatorname{V}(\mathbf{X}_k \mathbf{W}_k) 
    = \mathbf{W}_k^{\intercal} \operatorname{V}(\mathbf{X}_k) \mathbf{W}_k
    = \mathbf{W}_k^{\intercal} \mathbf{\Sigma}_k \mathbf{W}_k
    = I \quad \implies \quad \mathbf{W} = \mathbf{\Sigma}^{-1/2}

This is accomplished using an eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix or a
singular value decomposition of the data matrix. We can then use the 
transformation:

.. math::

    \mathbf{z}_k = \mathbf{W}_k^{\intercal}\mathbf{x}
    \quad \implies \quad \mathbf{Z}_k = \mathbf{X}\mathbf{W}_k

Since we are now working in the transformed space, the determinant goes to zero
and the inverse is simply the identity matrix. This results in the simplified
discriminant function:

.. math::

    \delta_k(\mathbf{z_k}) =  
    -\frac{1}{2}(\mathbf{z_k}-\mathbf{\mu_k})^{\intercal}(\mathbf{z_k}-\mathbf{\mu_k})
    + \log(\pi_k)

.. _Hilbert matrices: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert_matrix

Package Interface
=================

.. _format notes:

.. note::

    In DiscriminantAnalysis.jl, the input data matrix ``X`` is assumed to be 
    stored in the same format as a `design matrix`_ in statistics. In other 
    words, each row of ``X`` corresponds to an observation vector:

    .. math:: \mathbf{X} = 
                  \begin{bmatrix} 
                      \leftarrow \mathbf{x}_1 \rightarrow \\ 
                      \leftarrow \mathbf{x}_2 \rightarrow \\ 
                      \vdots \\ 
                      \leftarrow \mathbf{x}_n \rightarrow 
                   \end{bmatrix}
    
    This differs from other Julia packages.

.. _design matrix: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_matrix

.. function:: lda(X, y [; M, priors, gamma])

    Fit a regularized linear discriminant model based on data ``X`` and class 
    identifier ``y``. ``X`` must be a matrix of floats and ``y`` must be a 
    vector of positive integers that index the classes. ``M`` is an optional 
    matrix of class means. If ``M`` is not supplied, it defaults to point 
    estimates of the class means. The ``priors`` argument represents the prior 
    probability of class membership. If ``priors`` is not supplied, it defaults
    to equal class weights.

    .. note::

        See the `format notes`_ for the data matrix ``X``.
    
    Gamma is a regularization parameter that shrinks the covariance matrix 
    towards the average eigenvalue:

    .. math::

        \mathbf{\Sigma}(\gamma) = (1-\gamma)\mathbf{\Sigma} + \gamma
          \left(\frac{\operatorname{trace}(\mathbf{\Sigma})}{p}\right) \mathbf{I}

    This type of regularization can be used counteract bias in the eigenvalue
    estimates generated from the sample covariance matrix.

    The components of the LDA model may be extracted from the ``ModelLDA`` 
    object returned by the ``lda`` function:

    ========== =====================================================
    Argument   Description
    ========== =====================================================
    ``is_cda`` Boolean value; the model is a CDA model if ``true``
    ``W``      The whitening matrix used to decorrelate observations
    ``M``      A matrix of class means; one per row
    ``priors`` A vector of class prior probabilities
    ``gamma``  The regularization parameter as defined above.
    ========== =====================================================


.. function:: cda(X, y [; M, priors, gamma])

    Fit a regularized canonical discriminant model based on data ``X`` and class 
    identifier ``y``. The CDA model is identical to an LDA model, except that
    dimensionality reduction is included in the whitening transformation matrix.
    See the ``lda`` documentation for information on the arguments.

.. function:: qda(X, y [; M, priors, gamma, lambda])

    Fit a regularized quadratic discriminant model based on data ``X`` and class 
    identifier ``y``. ``X`` must be a matrix of floats and ``y`` must be a 
    vector of positive integers that index the classes. ``M`` is an optional 
    matrix of class means. If ``M`` is not supplied, it defaults to point 
    estimates of the class means. The ``priors`` argument represents the prior 
    probability of class membership. If ``priors`` is not supplied, it defaults
    to equal class weights.
    
    .. note::

        See the `format notes`_ for the data matrix ``X``.

    Lambda is a regularization parameter that shrinks the class covariance 
    matrices towards the overall covariance matrix:

    .. math::

        \mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\lambda) = (1-\lambda)\mathbf{\Sigma}_k 
         + \lambda \mathbf{\Sigma}

    As in LDA, gamma is a regularization parameter that shrinks the covariance
    matrix towards the average eigenvalue:

    .. math::

        \mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\gamma,\lambda) 
        = (1-\gamma)\mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\lambda) + \gamma
          \left(\frac{\operatorname{trace}(\mathbf{\Sigma}_{k}(\lambda))}{p}\right) \mathbf{I}
     
    The components of the QDA model may be extracted from the ``ModelQDA`` 
    object returned by the ``qda`` function:

    ========== =====================================================
    Argument   Description
    ========== =====================================================
    ``W_k``    The vector of whitening matrices (one per class)
    ``M``      A matrix of class means; one per row
    ``priors`` A vector of class prior probabilities
    ``gamma``  The regularization parameter as defined above.
    ``lambda`` The regularization parameter as defined above.
    ========== =====================================================

.. function:: discriminants(model, Z)

    Returns a matrix of discriminant function values based on ``model``. Each
    column of values corresponds to a class discriminant function and each row
    corresponds to the discriminant function values for an observation in ``Z``.
    For example, ``Z[i,j]`` corresponds to the discriminant function value of
    class ``j`` for observation ``i``.

.. function:: classify(model, Z)

    Returns a vector of class indices based on the classification rule. This
    function takes the output of the ``discriminants`` function and applies
    ``indmax`` to each row to determine the class.

References
==========

.. [fried] Friedman J. 1989. *Regularized discriminant analysis.* Journal of
           the American statistical association 84.405; p. 165-175.

.. [hff] Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J, Franklin J. 2005. *The elements of
         statistical learning: data mining, inference and prediction*. The 
         Mathematical Intelligencer, 27(2); p. 83-85.
